---
layout: post
title: "Backstory of Dungeons of Avalon II"
categories: lore
---

The following backstory is translated from the German version of the manual.

### Isle of Isla

Now 49 years have passed since the Dark Lord was defeated and killed by a group
of adventurers to whom we still owe our gratitude today. The country has since
returned to its former state. People have been going back to their everyday
pursuits for years.

The empire AVALON has grown even in the past. An island was colonized. This is
before AVALON and is the last outpost between AVALON and the big sea.

On the island was built a city called Isla. Isla grew fast and became more
brilliant than most of the other cities of the empire, though it was only
designed to protect AVALON. The city was an outpost of the Empire AVALON. The
wealth also had its downsides.

Isla became not only a magnet for traders, but also for many criminals. Here,
where the King's arm was not so strong, you could have everything for money,
even a new identity.

The king was greatly worried when Lord ROA, the mayor of Isla, had solicited the
help of the old king from a herald. The Herald was crazy when he arrived in
Ghale. He was no longer able to speak a word, it was a wonder he had made it to
Ghale at all. This man must have seen terrible things, for an hour later, after
delivering the dispatch, he died screaming with unimaginable agony. May his soul
find peace.

The dispatch:

"My King must send troops to me immediately or we are lost. I dictate these
lines in my tower. The enemy has surprised us. We have not been able to
determine who or what it is, we can only say that it is merciless and brutal.
Residents of the city have fled, except for a few brave ones who are still
persevering and helping me to resist the enemy.

My King, if only we knew who we were fighting against. I have never seen such
creatures. It is as if Hell has sent its henchmen to overrun Isla and later the
Empire of AVALON.

My guard is resisting, but it will not last much longer. My soldiers are simply
being mowed down. There are dark forces at work. We are powerless, even our best
magicians can not do anything against these monsters.

I can not know if this Herald will reach you. If not, we are all lost..

LORD ROA, Mayor of Isla."

The king immediately sent soldiers and magicians to Isla, but they have not
heard of them since.

The second squad, whom the king sent to Isla, was missing, no news, nothing. It
was not even known if the soldiers had reached the city.

Since the dispatch from Isla, now 4 weeks have passed. Dark clouds have been
gathering over Isla for days. You can also see the clouds from here from the
city. The distance between Ghale and Isla is quite large, so it scares me to
imagine the size of the clouds. The sky over Isla does not have to be seen
anymore.

After the fifth week, a panic broke out in the city. The dark clouds began to
move. They moved towards the empire. AVALON seemed to be in danger again. The
king was now more powerless than ever, he could do nothing more. Soldiers did
not use anything, magicians did not use anything. The enemy had to be very
powerful.

The empire prepared for a merciless struggle. Parts of the population fled
to the mountains. But no one could say if they were safer there.

The king decided that a small group of people should make their way to Isla to
bring light into the darkness. The king's advisors and he thought that a small
group would attract less attention than a troop of soldiers. This group might
have a chance, albeit a minor one, to explore the enemy or even defeat him...

Five heroes were chosen. Two fighters and three magicians were selected for this
mission. Heroes have been recruited from a variety of races by AVALON.

The Magicians of the Empire joined forces to create a spell that teleported the
group to Isla.....

### Notes

* This story also appears on the title screen of _Dungeons of Avalon II_ in
  German, with minor changes for spelling and grammar. It's fourteen screens
  long, followed by four pages for the credits. The English version is
  condensed to a single screen, plus the credits.
