---
layout: post
title: "Basic game mechanics"
categories: game
---

While much of the game is self-explanatory, the German-only game manual for
_Dungeons of Avalon_ includes some useful information that's not necessarily
obvious to the player. I've collected this below and added a few notes which
even the manual doesn't mention. This document contains no spoilers.

### Creating a new character

When creating a new character, you can click the "New" button above the
top-right of the character stat window to repeatedly re-roll the character's
starting stats until you get ones you like.

Once you create a new character, you still have to load them into your party
from the "load character" menu.

See
[Character creation and level up](../game/character-creation-and-level.html)
for a run-down on each race's specific statistics.

### Basic statistics

Your six ability scores are chosen randomly. As in many RPGs, they increase with
character level. The game manual doesn't explain what they do, so these meanings
are inferred by analysis of the the game code. They may do other things which
have not yet been discovered in the code.

IN: Intelligence (Inteligenz)
: I'm not sure what this actually does.

DX: Dexterity (Geschick)
: Technically required to wield certain weapons. However, all weapons in the
game have a Dexterity requirement of zero, so this is irrelevant.

WI: Wisdom (Weisheit)
: According to the game, spellcasters need this to learn new spell levels.
However, in reality, you gain a new level of spells every two levels after the
first
(see [Character creation and level up](../game/character-creation-and-level.html)).
Because level up always grants increased Wisdom, you don't notice this.

LU: Luck (Gl&uuml;ck)
: Increases your armor class (WC) by 1 per 16 points of Strength.

ST: Strength (Kraft)
: Technically required to wield certain weapons. However, all weapons in the
game have a Strength requirement of zero, so this is irrelevant.
Increases your attack stat (AC) by 1 per 16 points of Strength.

KO: Kondition (Kondition)
: Something like constitution or stamina.
Increases your attack stat (AC) by 1 per 256 points of Kondition.

Obvious to players familiar with RPGs, but with a few quirks:

EXP.
: Experience points. You do not automatically level up, but must return to
  a city and pay The Wise Three to train you. The manual doesn't mention that
  different classes need different amounts of XP to level up. See
  [Character creation and level up](../game/character-creation-and-level.html).

GOLD
: The amount of gold coins held by this particular character. To buy
  something, you may need to Pool All Gold at a shop, which will give one
  character all the party's gold. You can cheat this by making throwaway
  characters and pooling their gold away.

LP
: Life points, or hit points. It's also shown in the yellow bar.

MP
: Magic points, or mana. Shown in the red bar.

A new character's starting gold, LP and MP are chosen randomly, but modified by
race. A new character will start at level 1 with zero XP. The default starting
characters that you can load from disk are already at a higher level.

The _Dungeons of Avalon 1_ manual also says there's a stat called Runen-Level
(Rune Level), but this doesn't appear in the final game. Translated:

> The rune level is zero because you have to teach your hero to read runes
> later.

On the second stat page (click the left/right buttons above the top-right of the
character window), two further stats appear.

WC (RS)
: Armor class. According to the German manual, it's R&uuml;stungst&auml;rke,
meaning "armour strength". It's equivalent to
(Level+LU)/32 + item bonuses. The level maximum is 16, so it contributes
relatively little.

AC (AS)
: Attack class. In the German manual, it's called Angriffsst&auml;rke, meaning
"attack strength". It's equivalent to
(((Level+KO)/16)+ST)/16 + item bonuses. In other words, about 1 AC per 16 points
of ST, and one per 256 of KO.

### The city

The item shop, identified in the manual as specifically a weapon shop or arms
dealer, also lets you identify unknown items. However, no unidentified items
appear in _Dungeons of Avalon_, so you will never use this feature in the first
game. Some unidentified items appear in _Dungeons of Avalon II_.

The temple can heal your wounds, but according to the manual charges more based
on the number of life points to be healed and the experience of the character to
be healed. Actually, from analysis of the _DoA2_ game code, it costs half the
character's hit point maximum in gold to heal them, regardless of the actual
damage healed. It's a poor deal, as resting at a camp spot in dungeons is free
and safe.

The temple can heal all status effects. It costs 45 gold.

The temple can also resurrect slain party members. However, this doesn't
automatically cure any wounds or status effects they had, such as poison. You
can also resurrect a set of bones found in the dungeon by dragging it into an
empty party member slot and having it resurrected at the temple. Raising a
character costs four gold times the character's hit point maximum, and leaves
them on one hit point.

The trainers must be paid to increase in level, and to learn a new level of
spells. You must have acquired the requisite amount of XP to level up, and must
have reached the required level to learn new spells. Every two experience levels
after the first unlocks a new level of spells. The trainers will claim that you
need higher Wisdom to learn spells, but level is the only actual prerequisite.
The maximum experience level is 16, and the highest spell level is 8 (gained at
level 15).

### The dungeon

You can discard any item simply by clicking it in inventory, and then clicking
on the dungeon floor. After that, it's gone for good.

Squares with a "C" logo on them are safe spots where you can camp (rest). This
recovers LP and MP for free. There are no time-sensitive game elements, so
resting is a cost-effective way to heal up.

The compass direction you're facing is shown at the top of the screen. Note that
since the graphics for this were never updated to English, East is represented
by the letter "O" (for the German, Ost).

The manual mentions "spinners", squares which change your facing when you step
on them. These can be frustrating as they may cause you to walk back the way you
came, walk into a wall, or assume that a misclick or bug caused an incorrect
input somehow. Pay attention to your compass direction.

The manual also mentions antimagic (squares which dispel your ongoing spell
effects), teleporters (which bring you to another teleporter) and switches
(including wall switches, which can be clicked to toggle, or floor switches,
which toggle when their square is stepped on).

There are other dangers and secrets, but I'll omit them here since the manual
does not mention them. My advice is to pay attention and click on things.

### Combat

The combat system is largely self-explanatory.

Monster encounters are often divided into groups of monsters. This is
significant if you have a [spell](../game/spells.html) which targets a group of
enemies, rather than all enemies.

The first number in a monster line is the number of monsters in that group. All
monsters in a group will be of the same type. The second number is its distance
in metres.

According to the manual, "parry" is mainly useful when your character can't hit
anything, such as when they're in the back row and their weapons can't reach. It
increases the character's ability to defend themself. Note that it's not a
counter-hit system, as the term "parry" is sometimes used to mean in modern
video games.

Fleeing gives the enemy advantage and lets them attack directly, without
allowing the heroes to fight back.

Not mentioned in the manual, you can perform some unexpected moves with weapons.
You can stab with an arrow as a weapon, or even throw an arrow.
The bolas can be used in melee or thrown, as can the dagger and spear.
You can also fight empty-handed.

NPC characters can be raised from bones, which can be found in the dungeon,
dragged into an empty character slot and resurrected in a temple as normal. NPCs
act automatically in combat and do not gain XP. According to the manual,
"A good NPC can help a group get better experience points", which may suggest
that XP is divided between non-NPCs only. You also cannot observe or change an
NPC's inventory. Some NPCs are higher level than the maximum normally allowable.

### Symbols

The four boxes on each side of the main screen are for symbols which indicate
when beneficial spells are in effect on the party:

* __Eye:__ A Magic Eye is watching over the party. Clicking it shows your
coordinates in the dungeon and will identify adjacent traps.
* __Orb:__ Clicking this symbol will show a top-down view of the map, but only
places the party has already been. The spell "Eagles View" is a better auto-map
feature which shows more details of the dungeon.
* __Feather:__ Party is levitating.
* __Shield:__ The party is protected by a spell which increases both Armor Class
and Attack (the WC and AC stats appearing on the second character page).

### Items

Text scrolls simply contain information you can read. They and other items can
be activated with "Use Object".

Equippable items must be placed in the correct slot to be effective. Weapons go
in the right hand, and shields in the left.

### Spells

Spells cost MP, which can be recovered by resting at a camp site.

Spell scrolls (and spells you can cast in general) are divided into three
colours:

* __Red__ are for combat spells, and can only be used in combat.
* __Blue__ are healing spells, and can be used both in and out of combat.
* __Yellow__ are dungeon spells, which can do things like defuse traps. They can
only work outside of combat.

There is a full article on [Spells](../game/spells.html).
