---
layout: post
title: "Bugs"
categories: game
---

Various bugs appear in _Dungeons of Avalon_, ranging from spelling mistakes to
major issues which make the game unwinnable.

1. Table of Contents
{:toc}

### DoA1 is unwinnable

_Affects: Dungeons of Avalon 1, all versions_

A major bug prevents DoA1 from triggering the victory event when the final boss is
defeated. The game checks the boss fight's entry in the fixed encounter list to
see if the Dark Lord and his entourage have been defeated, but the fixed encounter
list is not actually decremented when the monster is defeated.

The final boss is also extremely difficult, featuring 13 Fire Trolls in addition to
the Dark Lord himself. Even experienced RPG player "The CRPG Addict", in his
[Dungeons of Avalon playthrough](https://crpgaddict.blogspot.com/2015/08/dungeons-of-avalon-defeated-with-final.html),
was unable to defeat the final boss with max-level characters.

_Solution:_ It's possible, using save state editing, to force the win condition
to trigger, allowing you to see the victory screen and credits roll as intended.
See [How to see the Dungeons of Avalon 1 ending](../secrets/doa1-ending.html).

### NPC locations incorrect

_Affects: Dungeons of Avalon II, all English versions_

In the English release of _Dungeons of Avalon II_, all NPC encounters are bugged.
Text strings are cut off at the beginning, NPCs display with the wrong graphics
or none at all, and NPCs do not accept or give the correct items to progress the
game. DoA2 English is unwinnable.

An unofficial patched version was distributed back in the day, which corrected
some spellings and attempted to fix an off-by-one error in the NPC handling
code. However, this version still displays incorrect graphics and text.

In fact, the bug appears to be caused by extraneous null bytes in the
English NPC text. There may also be some minor text formatting errors.
The bug appears in every known English version, but not in the German version.

_Solution:_ Using a hex editor, make the following changes to the main game
executable `AVALON-II-E`:

1. Change the following bytes from `00` to `5f`: `0xad06`, `0xafae`,
   and `0xb13d`.
2. Optionally, correct these minor formatting errors while you're here:
   at `0xae73`, "cePERMISSION" should be "cfPERMISSION", and
   at `0xaf80`, "xq" should be "mq".
3. If you're using the spelling-corrected version, you will need to remove
   its wonky patch by editing four bytes at `0x71d2` back from `53 40 61 d2`
   to `61 00 ff 4a`. If it already says `61 00 ff 4a`, you're good.
   To check your version, try to learn spells from the Wise Three in town:
   if they say "YOUR WISDOM IS TO LESS", it's the original version.
   If they say "NOT ENOUGH WISDOM" it's the patched one and you'll need
   to make this edit.

_Alternative solution:_ Play the German version using the translations
on the map pages at this site, or use Google Translate, which is very
good at German to English these days.

### Empty dungeon

_Affects: Some versions of Dungeons of Avalon, bootleg English translation only_

Some users reported that in the original _Dungeons of Avalon_, entering the dungeon
reveals an empty space. You cannot return from here, because there are no stairs up.

This is caused by a missing `DUNG` file in some versions
(see [version differences](../history/version-differences.html)). Someone preparing
a pirate copy of the disk appears to have noticed that there were two copies of
`DUNG` on the disk and deleted one, unaware that it was needed by the game. If the
version you have says "PARADISE 92" at the bottom of the screen, you may have the
bugged version.

_Solution:_ Instead of starting a new game, load from a save game. By default, all save
games start at the beginning of the game, and include the blank map as part of the save
data. Or, play a different release of the game, such as the official English translation.

### Confusing stat names

_Affects: Both games, English versions_

In German, the two key stats displayed on the inventory screen are "RS"
(_Rüstungstärke_, "armor strength") and "AS" (_Angriffsstärke_, "attack strength").
In English, these are translated as WC and AC, respectively. This leads a lot of
players to assume that these stats are "Weapon Class" and "Armor Class". In fact,
they're the other way around. You can see this by equipping or removing armor.

_Solution:_ You might think of WC as "worn class" and AC as "attack class".

### Spelling errors

_Affects: Both games, English versions_

Too many to list here.

_Solution:_ Just enjoy the quirky translation. Improved translations for some pieces
of the game text appear at various pages on this site.

### Not a bug

_Affects: Dungeons of Avalon II, all versions_

A door in the [Tower of Roa, level 2](../maps/doa2-tower2.html) cannot be picked
even by a maximum-level Thief, and no key opens it. Some players assume that this
is a bug. In fact, it's not a bug, although it can only be picked by a level 28 or
higher thief, when the max level any player character can reach is 16.

However, there is one character who can pick it: Rahven, an NPC thief who is
level 32 (but there is no way to know this, since you can't look at NPC stats).
Rahven's bones are found in a chest the west of the map. Drag their bones into
an empty party slot and have them raised from the dead at a temple.
